>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, DECEMBER 6:
PRESIDENT OBAMA ADDRESSES THE
NATION ABOUT HOMEGROWN TERRORIST
ATTACKS AND MASS SHOOTINGS.
LIBERALS AND CONSERVATIVES
COMING TOGETHER ON A PLAN TO
REDUCE POVERTY IN AMERICA.
ALSO, THE BATTLE OVER NET
NEUTRALITY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan:
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA TRIED TO
REASSURE AMERICANS THAT THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT IS DOING EVERYTHING
IT CAN TO PROTECT US FROM
POTENTIAL TERRORIST ATTACKS LIKE
THE ONE LAST WEEK IN SAN
BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA.
THE PRESIDENT SPOKE TO THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC FROM THE OVAL
OFFICE TONIGHT FOR ONLY THE
THIRD TIME IN HIS PRESIDENCY.
HE SAID THERE IS NO EVIDENCE
THAT CALIFORNIA COUPLE WHO
GUNNED DOWN 14 PEOPLE AND
WOUNDED MORE IN WAS DIRECTED BY
INDEMNITY OVERSEAS ORGANIZATION
OR PART OF ANY BROADER
CONSPIRACY HERE IN THE U.S.
BUT HE ALSO SAID THE MILITARY
WILL HUNT DOWN LEADERS OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ AND SYRIA
KNOWN AS ISIS OR ISIL AND TRAIN
FORCES THERE TO FIGHT THE GROUP
ON THE GROUND.
THE PRESIDENT SAID HE WOULD ASK
CONGRESS TO CONTINUE THE USE OF
MILITARY FORCE.
>> IF CONGRESS BELIEVES LIKE I
DO THAT WE ARE AT WAR WITH ISIL
IT SHOULD GO AHEAD AND VOTE TO
AUTHORIZE THE CONTINUED USE OF
MILITARY FORCE AGAINST THESE
TERRORISTS.
FOR OVER A YEAR I HAVE ORDERED
OUR MILITARY TO TAKE THOUSANDS
OF AIR STRIKES AGAINST ISIL
TARGETS.
I THINK IT'S TIME FOR CONGRESS
TO VOTE TO DEMONSTRATE THAT THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE ARE UNITED AND
COMMITTED TO THIS FIGHT.
>> Sreenivasan: CITING SAN
BERNADINO THE MOST
LETHAL SHOOTING SINCE THREE
YEARS AGO CALLED ON CONGRESS TO
PASS NEW GUN CONTROL MEASURES.
>> CONGRESS SHOULD MAKE SURE NO
ONE ON A NO FLY LIST IS ABLE TO
BUY A GUN. WHAT COULD POSSIBLY
BE THE ARGUMENT FOR ALLOWING A
TERRORIST SUSPECT TO BUY A SEMI
AUTOMATIC WEAPON.
IT'S A MATTER OF NATIONAL
SECURITY WE ALSO NEED TO MAKE IT
HARDER FOR PEOPLE TO BUY
POWERFUL ASSAULT WEAPONS LIKE
THE ONES USED IN SAN BERNARDINO.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
ALSO CAUTIONED AGAINST THE U.S.
ENTERING A GROUND WAR AGAINST
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
>> THAT'S WHAT GROUPS LIKE ISIL
WANT.
THEY KNOW THEY CAN'T DEFEAT US
ON THE BATTLEFIELD.
ISIL FIGHTERS WERE PART OF THE
INSURGENCY THAT WE FACED IN IRAQ
BUT THEY ALSO KNOW IF WE OCCUPY
FOREIGN LANDS, THEY CAN MAINTAIN
INSURGENCIES FOR YEARS, KILLING
THOUSANDS OF OUR TROOPS DRAINING
OUR RESOURCES AND USING OUR
PRESENCE TO DRAW NEW RECRUITS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND HE ALSO
ADDRESSED MUSLIM COMMUNITIES
DIRECTLY.
>> MUSLIM LEADERS HERE AND
AROUND THE GLOBE HAVE TO
CONTINUE WORKING WITH US TO
DECISIVELY AND UNEQUIVOCALLY
REJECT THE HATEFUL IDEOLOGY THAT
GROUPS LIKE ISIL AND AL QAEDA
PROMOTE.
TO SPEAK OUT AGAINST NOT JUST
ACTS OF VIOLENCE BUT ALSO THOSE
INTERPRETATIONS OF ISLAM THAT
ARE INCOMPATIBLE OF THE VALUES
OF RELIGIOUS TOLERANCE, MUTUAL
RESPECT AND HUMAN DIGNITY.
>> Sreenivasan: SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD SAYS BRITISH AIR
STRIKES ON ISIS TARGETS IN SYRIA
HAVE NO CHANCE TO SUCCEED
WITHOUT GROUND TROOPS BACKING
THEM UP.
IN AN INTERVIEW WITH BRITAIN'S
"SUNDAY TIMES" PUBLISHED TODAY,
ASSAD MOCKED THE STRATEGY OF
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER DAVID
CAMERON AND CAMERON'S CLAIM THAT
70,000 MODERATE REBELS ARE
FIGHTING THE SYRIAN REGIME.
ASSAD SAID THE NUMBER IS MUCH
SMALLER.
BRITISH WARPLANES BEGAN BOMBING
ISIS-CONTROLLED OIL FIELDS IN
SYRIA THREE DAYS AGO.
ASSAD TOLD "THE TIMES" ONLY
RUSSIAN AIRSTRIKES AGAINST ISIS
TARGETS ARE WORKING.
RUSSIA BACKS THE ASSAD REGIME.
BRITISH NEWSPAPERS ARE QUOTING
AN EYEWITNESS TO LAST NIGHT'S
STABBING ATTACK IN THE LONDON
UNDERGROUND AS SAYING THE
ATTACKER SHOUTED:
"THIS IS FOR SYRIA."
WITH NO WARNING, POLICE SAY A
29-YEAR-OLD MAN WITH A KNIFE
INJURED TWO PEOPLE, ONE
SERIOUSLY, IN AN UNPROVOKED
ATTACK.
SCOTLAND YARD SAYS IT IS
TREATING THE TRAIN STATION
ATTACK IN EAST LONDON AS A,
QUOTE, "TERRORIST INCIDENT."
POLICE OFFICERS SUBDUED THE
ATTACKER WITH A STUN GUN BEFORE
PINNING HIM TO THE GROUND.
SCOTLAND YARD HAS NOT COMMENTED
ON THE MOTIVE.
A REPORT ON POVERTY PUBLISHED ON
THURSDAY FOUND A STRIKING LACK
OF ECONOMIC MOBILITY IN AMERICA,
THAT 43% OF AMERICANS BORN INTO
FAMILIES IN THE BOTTOM FIFTH OF
THE ECONOMIC LADDER ARE STUCK
THERE AS ADULTS, WHILE 40% BORN
IN THE TOP FIFTH STAY THERE.
THE DATA WAS PART OF
"OPPORTUNITY, RESPONSIBILITY AND
SECURITY: A CONSENSUS PLAN FOR
REDUCING POVERTY AND RESTORING
THE AMERICAN DREAM."
IT WAS A PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN TWO
THINK TANKS FROM DIFFERENT SIDES
OF THE IDEOLOGICAL SPECTRUM:
THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTE AND THE
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE.
AS PART OF OUR SERIES ON POVERTY
CALLED "CHASING THE DREAM," THE
NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON SAT
DOWN WITH TWO AUTHORS OF THE
REPORT, KAY HYMOWITZ AND LARRY
ABER.
>> Reporter: I WANT TO TALK
ABOUT ONE OF THE ISSUES THAT
COMES UP PRETTY EARLY IN THE
REPORT-- WHICH IS THE DECLINE OF
MARRIAGE.
KAY, CAN YOU TALK A LITTLE BIT--
ABOUT THAT AND HOW IT'S RELATED
TO POVERTY?
>> YEAH.
WELL, WE'VE HAD AN INCREASING
NUMBER OF CHILDREN LIVING WITH
SINGLE MOTHERS AND GROWING UP
WITH SINGLE MOTHERS.
IF WE LOOK AT IT BY RACE, ABOUT
72% OF BLACK CHILDREN ARE BORN
TO SINGLE MOTHERS, 53% OF
HISPANIC CHILDREN, AND ABOUT 30%
OF WHITE CHILDREN.
AND WE NOW KNOW, FROM YEARS OF
RESEARCHING THIS, THAT THOSE
CHILDREN ARE AT GREATER RISK OF
ALL KINDS OF PROBLEMS, ONE OF
THEM BEING POVERTY.
THE POVERTY RATES AMONG SINGLE
MOTHER FAMILIES IS FOUR TO FIVE
TIMES HIGHER THAN THAT OF
CHILDREN GROWING UP WITH MARRIED
PARENTS.
>> INDEED, PLACES WE ARRIVED AT
WAS THAT CONSERVATIVES WERE ABLE
TO SAY, "MY GOSH.
IF WE COULD HELP FAMILIES PLAN
THEIR PREGNANCY EFFECTIVELY," A
POSITION, HISTORICALLY, TAKEN BY
PROGRESSIVES, "THAT WOULD BE A
GREAT THING."
AND THE REAL SURPRISE IS
PROGRESSIVES WERE ABLE TO SAY,
"NOT ONLY ARE STAPLE, TWO-PARENT
FAMILIES THE VERY BEST
ENVIRONMENTS FOR CHILDREN TO
DEVELOP," WHICH WE KNOW NOW FROM
20 YEARS OF VERY RIGOROUS
RESEARCH, "BUT IN AMERICA,
ANYWAY-- THE HIGHEST PROBABILITY
OF GETTING TO A STABLE, TWO-
PARENT FAMILY IS THROUGH
MARRIAGE."
>> Reporter: THERE'S ANOTHER
SURPRISING STATISTIC IN THE
REPORT THAT THE WAGES OF MEN IN
THE 50th PERCENTILE AND LOWER
HAVE BASICALLY STAYED THE SAME
SINCE THE '70S.
I MEAN, WHY IS THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK THERE'S A LOT
OF DISAGREEMENT ABOUT WHY THAT
IS.
AND IT'S NOT A QUESTION THAT WE
SOUGHT TO ANSWER.
>> AND WE DID NOT SETTLE THAT.
(LAUGHS)
>> NO.
BUT ONE OF THE POSSIBILITIES
THAT IS THAT IT'S BASED ON
SKILL-BASED TECHNOLOGIES THAT
REQUIRE PEOPLE TO HAVE MORE
SKILLS BEFORE THEY CAN GET A JOB
YOU COULD HAVE A GUY WHO DROPPED
OUT OF HIGH SCHOOL COULD GO
DIRECTLY TO A FACTORY, A UNION
JOB THAT WOULD PROVIDE HIM WITH
A FAIRLY GOOD LIFE AND HIS
FAMILY, WITH A FAIRLY GOOD LIFE.
THAT IS NO LONGER THE CASE.
>> IF AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEN'S
WAGES ROSE AT THE RATE OF
EVERYBODY ELSE'S OVER THE LAST
30 OR 40 YEARS, A HUGE AMOUNT OF
THE POVERTY PROBLEM WOULD BE
REDUCED.
SO THERE IS A REAL PROBLEM WITH
THE LACK OF GROWTH OF WAGES
AMONG LOW-EDUCATED, YOUNG, AND
ESPECIALLY AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEN.
SO WE SHARE THAT ALARM OVER
THAT.
>> Reporter: IN THE REPORT, YOU
PROPOSE RAISING THE MINIMUM
WAGE.
I THINK SOME PEOPLE MIGHT FIND
THAT A LITTLE SURPRISING THAT
SOME CONSERVATIVES SORT OF CAME
AROUND TO THAT, GIVEN JUST HOW
CONTROVERSIAL-- YOU KNOW, IT IS,
AT LEAST IN WASHINGTON.
KAY, CAN YOU TALK ABOUT THE
CONSERVATIVE JUSTIFICATION FOR
RAISING THE MINIMUM WAGE?
>> WELL, THAT WAS A VERY TRICKY
AREA.
I WOULD SAY IT WAS ONE OF THE
TWO TOP TRICKIEST AREAS.
FOR INSTANCE, CONSERVATIVES ARE-
- THE CONSERVATIVE GROUP WAS
MORE LIKELY TO BE WORRIED ABOUT
THE LOSS OF JOBS THAT MIGHT
FOLLOW A MINIMUM WAGE INCREASE,
MORE THAN THE PROGRESSIVES WERE
CONCERNED ABOUT THAT.
THEY WERE MUCH MORE CONCERNED
ABOUT THE INCOME OF THE PEOPLE
WHO HAD THE JOBS.
>> THIS IS AN EXAMPLE OF HOW THE
GROUP OF TRIED TO PRACTICE
PRINCIPLED AND REASONED
DISCUSSION TO GET TO DECISIONS.
SO KAY IS EXACTLY RIGHT.
AT SUCH LOW WAGES NOW DOES NOT
LIFT THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE LOW-
WAGE JOBS OUT OF POVERTY.
CONSERVATIVES DON'T WANT THAT
EITHER.
SO WE'RE TRYING, ON THE BASIS OF
EVIDENCE AS WELL AS VALUES, TO
FIND THE SWEET SPOT.
AND THAT REALLY WAS WHAT THE
DISCUSSION WAS ABOUT.
NOW, THE SWEET SPOT IS HIGHLY
POLITICIZED.
AND SO WE'RE TRYING TO BRING
LIGHT, NOT HEAT, TO THESE
ISSUES.
>> Reporter: I NOTICED THE
REPORT, THOUGH, DID NOT
MENTION...
>> COME WITH A NUMBER.
(LAUGHS)
>> Reporter: ....A SPECIFIC
NUMBER.
>> WELL, FOR THAT--
>> YES, IT SHOULD BE HIGHER THAN
THE CURRENT LEVEL AND LOWER THAN
$15 AN HOUR.
(LAUGHS)
AND WE ALL AGREE ON THAT.
>> YEAH.
THAT'S WHERE WE HAD TO LEAVE IT.
>> Reporter: THE REPORT SUGGESTS
THAT IT COULD BE HELPFUL TO
INCREASE WORK REQUIREMENTS FOR
CERTAIN BENEFITS.
>> WELL, THE 1996 WELFARE REFORM
LAW, REMEMBER, EMPHASIZED
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY.
IT ADDED A WORK REQUIREMENT.
AND THAT WAS SOMETHING NEW IN
POVERTY POLICY.
WHAT WE FOUND IS THAT WELFARE IS
NO LONGER A CHIEF DRIVER OF
BENEFITS FOR THE POOR.
WE HAVE MANY, MANY OTHER SOURCES
OF BENEFITS FOR THE POOR.
AND NONE OF THEM, OR VERY FEW OF
THEM, HAVE ANY WORK REQUIREMENTS
ATTACHED TO THEM.
SO FOR CONSERVATIVES, ESPECIALLY
BECAUSE THEY DO BELIEVE THAT THE
WELFARE REFORM BILL WAS
BASICALLY A SUCCESS, THE BELIEF
IS THAT AT THE VERY LEAST, WE
SHOULD EXPERIMENT WITH WORK
REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD STAMPS OR
FOR HOUSING AND THAT KIND OF
THING.
>> STRONGLY THAT IF WE WERE
CONDITIONED FOOD STAMPS THERE
WOULD BE NO SAFETY NET THAT
CERTAIN VERY VULNERABLE FAMILIES
COULD NOT FALL THROUGH.
AND THAT SEEMED JUST UNVIABLE TO
US.
ON THE OTHER HAND, I THINK THAT
THERE IS A BELIEF THAT, AND IT'S
CONSISTENT WITH DATA THAT WORK
REQUIREMENTS IN THE WELFARE
REFORM BILL DID INCREASE SINGLE
MOTHER'S LABOR FORCE
PARTICIPATION IN A ROBUST
ECONOMY.
>> Reporter: THERE'S ANOTHER
STATISTIC IN THE COURT REPORT
ABOUT HOW THE EMPLOYMENT RATE
AMONG YOUNG AFRICAN-AMERICAN MEN
HAS BASICALLY DROPPED IN THE
LAST FEW DECADES.
AGAIN, JUST SPEAKING IN TERMS OF
SOLUTIONS, HOW DO WE SOLVE THOSE
PROBLEMS?
>> WELL, WE HAVE A GREAT DEAL OF
CONCERN, THROUGHOUT THE REPORT
ABOUT WHAT WE CALL "DISCONNECTED
MEN."
WE WANT TO SEE BETTER SKILLS FOR
THESE MEN.
THAT IS A MAJOR PIECE OF OUR
CONTRIBUTION I THINK HERE WAS TO
TAKE THE FOCUS AWAY SO MUCH FROM
FOUR-YEAR COLLEGE, WHICH IS THE
AND TO THINK MORE ABOUT THE
KINDS OF OPPORTUNITIES THAT ARE
AVAILABLE IN MORE TECHNICAL,
MORE BLUE-COLLAR AREAS.
AND-- SO THAT'S ANOTHER THING WE
WOULD LIKE TO SEE.
>> WHEN YOUNG MEN DON'T EITHER
HAVE THE EDUCATION TO GET THE
JOBS THAT EXIST OR THE WORK
EXPERIENCE TO GET IT, THEN WE
RECOMMENDED APPRENTICESHIPS AS A
FORM WHERE THEY CAN GET BOTH,
EVEN-- EVEN WHEN THEY'RE NOT
QUITE READY TO TAKE THAT NEXT
STEP INTO THE FORMAL LABOR
MARKET.
>> THE SECTORS THAT NEED TO TAKE
UP THE CHALLENGE ARE POLITICAL
SECTORS, COMMUNITY
ORGANIZATIONS, THE MEDIA.
>> STATE GOVERNMENTS, TOO.
>> STATE GOVERNMENTS, WHAT
CITIES COULD DO IN THIS.
SO I THINK OUR JOB WAS TO
INDICATE THAT IT IS POSSIBLE FOR
PROGRESSIVES AND CONSERVATIVES,
THROUGH PRINCIPLED AND
REASONDISCUSSIONS, THAT COULD
COME UP WITH A SET OF IDEAS THAT
COULD MOVE US FORWARD.
>> I THINK THAT WE ARE FACING A
FUTURE WHERE WE HAVE A LOT OF
DISGRUNTLEMENT WITH THE AMERICAN
DREAM, WITH THE AMERICAN
PROMISE.
AND RIGHTFULLY SO.
WE ARE NOT PROVIDING THE
CONDITIONS THAT HELP PEOPLE TO
MOVE AHEAD AND TO TAKE FULL
ADVANTAGE OF THE AMERICAN
POSSIBILITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE MORE FROM
THE "CHASING THE DREAM" SERIES,
INCLUDING OUR REPORT ON
AMERICANS LIVING ON LESS THAN $2
A DAY.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour
THE ABILITY OF THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT TO REGULATE BROADBAND
INTERNET SERVICE IS BACK IN
COURT.
THE WASHINGTON D.C. FEDERAL
APPEALS COURT HEARD ARGUMENTS ON
FRIDAY BY THE CABLE AND TELECOM
INDUSTRY CHALLENGING RULES THE
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS
COMMISSION ESTABLISHED EARLIER
THIS YEAR REGARDING NET
NEUTRALITY.
FOR SOME INSIGHT INTO THIS
DEBATE, I AM JOINED BY ARIK
HESSELDAHL, A SENIOR EDITOR OF
THE TECHNOLOGY NEWS WEBSITE
"RE/CODE."
>> SO WHY IS IT BACK IN COURT
AND FOR A BIT OF BACKGROUND I
GUESS WHAT'S THE ORIGINAL INTENT
THAT'S BEING CHALLENGED?
>> THE ORIGINAL INTENT IS
WHETHER OR NOT THE FCC HAS THE
AUTHORITY TO REGULATE THE
INTERNET AS A UTILITY.
BASICALLY WHAT THEY DID IS AFTER
A SERIES OF OTHER CHALLENGES IN
COURT AND LEGISLATIVE RANG LING
AND POLICY MAKING, THEY HAD TO
REGULATE THE DIAL TONE OF THE
OLD TELEPHONE STEAL TO REGULATE
THE INTERNET, THE INTERNET IS
CONSIDERED A TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICE, AS AN INFORMATION
SERVICE PROVIDER.
AND THAT'S JUST A LITTLE BIT OF
LEGAL JUJITSU.
BUT WHAT IT COMES DOWN TO IS THE
SERVICE PROVIDERS WANT THE
ABILITY TO REGULATE WHAT DATA
FLOWS ON THEIR NETWORK AN
FAVORABILITY, TO PACKETS THEY
FAVOR AND PACKETS THEY DON'T
FAVOR.
IF YOU'RE HULU OUR NETFLIX OR
SOMEONE LIKE THAT, YOU DON'T
WANT A CABLE COMPANY THAT ALSO
HAS A VIDEO ON DEMAND SERVICE TO
CONTROL WHETHER OR NOT YOUR
CUSTOMERS CAN WATCH YOUR
CONTENT, IF YOU ARE HULU OR
NETFLIX ABOUT.
>> MY NETFLIX MOVIES MIGHT GET
HERE SLOWER OR I MAY HAVE TO PAY
MORE TO GET THEM AT THE SAME
SPEED?
>> EXACTLY.
THE CARRIERS MAY WANT TO CREATE
A FAST LAND, COST WOULD BE
PASSED ON TO THE CUSTOMERS.
IT IS A LONG AND DIFFICULT
POLICY TO DEBATE.
SO WHAT HAPPENED IS THE FCC
DECIDED TO RULE ON THE
REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
>> HAS THERE BEEN ANY CHANGE
FROM THE RULE FROM SUMMER UNTIL
NOW?
A REACTION THE INDUSTRY IS
FIGHTING OR ARE THEY TRYING TO
PREVENT SOMETHING?
>> I THINK THEY'RE ESSENTIALLY
ARGUING THAT THE SERVICE
PROVIDERS DON'T REALLY PROVIDE A
LOT OF INTELLIGENCE INTO THE
NETWORK ITSELF.
THEY'RE LITERALLY BEING ASKED TO
PASS ON PACKETS AND DATA,
ESSENTIALLY ON A BEST-EFFORT
BASIS AN TO TREAT EVERY PACKET
ESSENTIALLY THE SAME.
SO THE EXAMPLE I'VE ALWAYS USED
IS IF YOU ARE SETTING UP A TOLL
ROAD YOU CAN CHARGE MORE FOR
TRUCKS VERSUS REGULAR CARS.
IN THIS CASE THEY'RE BEING ASKED
TO ESSENTIALLY CHARGE THE SAME
RATE FOR EVERY VEHICLE THAT
PASSES THROUGH TOLL BOOTH
ESSENTIALLY WHETHER OR NOT IT IS
A TRUCK OR A CAR.
THAT'S THE BASIS OF THE ARGUMENT
THAT THEY'RE RUNNING UP AGAINST
HERE.
AND THE INDUSTRY IS BASICALLY
ARGUING THAT IT'S INTERFERING
WITH THEIR INTENT TO INVEST IN
THEIR INFRASTRUCTURE WHICH IS
KIND OF SILLY WHEN YOU THINK
ABOUT IT, BECAUSE THEY SPENT
TENS OF BILLIONS IF NOT HUNDREDS
OF BILLIONS OF DOLLARS TO BUILD
OUT THIS NETWORK.
THE DEMAND IS NOT GOING TO GO
AWAY.
I FAIL TO SEE A KAY THAT -- A
CASE THAT SCEERM DEMAND IS GOING
TO GO AWAY.
>> CONSUMER DEMAND IS GOING TO
GO AWAY.
>> ARIK HESSELDAHL, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE MOST
PROMINENT AND PROLIFIC AMERICAN
ARTISTS OF THE PAST 50 YEARS IS
ALEX KATZ.
BEST KNOWN FOR HIS BRIGHT,
BILLBOARD-SIZED PORTRAITS,
NEARING 90, KATZ STILL PAINTS,
AND DIVIDES HIS TIME BETWEEN
NEW YORK AND MAINE.
THE NEWSHOUR'S PHIL HIRSCHKORN
HAS THIS PROFILE THAT WE FIRST
BROUGHT YOU THIS SUMMER.
>> Reporter: EVEN AT 88-YEARS-
OLD, ALEX KATZ PAINTS ALMOST
EVERY DAY.
>> I LIKE DOING IT.
YOU NEVER KNOW WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN WHEN YOU START ON A
CANVAS.
I LOVE THE ADVENTURE.
AND I LOVE STICKING IT TO PEOPLE
WHO DIDN'T THINK I WAS ANYTHING
FOR SO MANY YEARS.
>> Reporter: STARTING OUT, KATZ
THOUGHT HE COULD BE NEVER A
FULL-TIME PAINTER WITHOUT A
PART-TIME JOB.
WHEN I SAT DOWN WITH HIM OUTSIDE
HIS SUMMER STUDIO IN
LINCONVILLE, MAINE, HE TOLD ME
HIS FIRST GALLERY SHOWS DIDN'T
SELL MUCH.
>> I HAD FIVE FLOPS IN A ROW.
>> Reporter: AND NOW, YOU'RE IN
MUSEUMS ALL OVER THE WORLD.
>> YEAH.
I'M RIGHT NEAR THE TOP OF THE
PYRAMID AT THIS POINT.
>> Reporter: THIS SUMMER'S
RETROSPECTIVE AT ATLANTA'S HIGH
MUSEUM FEATURED CLASSIC KATZ.
GROUP PORTRAITS
BRIGHT COLORS.
CLEAN LINES.
AND HIS MAIN SUBJECT OF RECENT
YEARS: LANDSCAPES.
HIS INSPIRATION COMES FROM
OBSERVATION.
LIKE A WALLFLOWER, PAINTING
FAMILY AND FRIENDS AND OTHER
PEOPLE HE MEETS.
>> YEAH, I'VE ASKED WAITERS,
WAITRESSES TO POSE.
YOU KNOW, THEY THINK I'M COMING
ON.
AND SOMEONE TELLS THEM, "OH NO.
HE'S A REALLY GOOD PAINTER."
>> Reporter: HIS FAVORITE
SUBJECT ACROSS THE DECADES HAS
BEEN HIS WIFE, ADA, PAINTING HER
MORE THAN 250 TIMES.
>> ADA'S LIKE A PERFECT MODEL.
PICASSO WOULD HAVE JUMPED AT
HER.
HER MEASUREMENTS WAS MISS
AMERICA.
ADA LITERALLY STOPPED THE
TRAFFIC THE FIRST TIME SHE CAME
IN A BATHING SUIT.
SHE USED TO-- SHE GOES ON A
BEACH, GUYS FALL OVER.
>> Reporter: THE COLBY COLLEGE
MUSEUM, IN MAINE, HOUSES THE
LARGEST KATZ COLLECTION
ANYWHERE: 850 WORKS.
COLBY NOW HAS AN EXHIBIT
FOCUSING ON KATZ'S EARLY WORK,
FROM THE 1950s.
DIANA TUITTE IS THE CURATOR.
>> I THINK THAT WHAT ALEX SEEMED
TO KNOW COMING OUT OF ART SCHOOL
WAS THAT HE DIDN'T WANT TO BE
DOING WHAT ANYONE ELSE WAS
DOING.
INITIALLY, KATZ PAINTED FROM
PHOTOGRAPHS-- LIKE THESE FIGURES
IN A FIELD, OR THESE FOUR
CHILDREN.
THEN, WHILE TAKING ART CLASSES
IN MAINE, KATZ SAYS, HE FOUND
HIS EYES.
>> I LIKE THE LIGHT.
THE FURTHER NORTH YOU GET, THE
LESS WHITE LIGHT YOU HAVE AND
THE MORE COLOR.
AND I THOUGHT THE COLOR AROUND
HERE, YOU KNOW, IS JUST REALLY
MARVELOUS.
AND THAT WAS A BIG REASON FOR
COMING HERE.
>> Reporter: HE'S COME BACK TO
COASTAL MAINE FOR THE PAST 61
SUMMERS.
HE BUILT A STUDIO OVERLOOKING A
POND AND OFTEN FINDS SUBJECT
MATTER RIGHT OUTSIDE THE WINDOW.
WHEN KATZ HAS AN IDEA, HE FIRST
DRAWS A SKETCH AND THEN PAINTS A
SMALL STUDY.
WHEN HE RETURNS TO MANHATTAN IN
SEPTEMBER, KATZ TRANSFORMS THE
STUDIES INTO A LARGE CANVASS.
SO THIS... BECOMES THIS.
KATZ WORKS FAST, APPLYING
DIFFERENT COLORS AND LAYERS OF
WET PAINT ON TOP OF EACH OTHER.
I WATCHED HIM COMPLETE THIS 15-
FOOT-BY-11-FOOT PAINTING OF
TREES IN JUST 90 MINUTES.
HE HAS REALLY TRANSCENDED ANY
ART MOVEMENT AND CONTINUES TO
REALLY BE INFLUENTIAL FOR YOUNG
PAINTERS TODAY.
>> WHAT'S HAPPENING NOW IS THAT
IT'S LIKE AN EXPLOSION OF
DIFFERENT PEOPLE ARE INTERESTED
IN MY WORK THAN WERE, LIKE, TEN
YEARS AGO.
>> Reporter: WHY DO YOU THINK
THAT IS?
>> I THINK LONGEVITY IS PART OF
IT.
AND I THINK THE BIG CHANGE FROM
THE ABSOLUTISM OF MODERN ART TO
THE OPEN AREA WE ARE IN NOW.
I FIT.
I THINK IN A SENSE THE WORLD
CAUGHT UP WITH ME.
>> Reporter: MOST PEOPLE YOUR
AGE SLOW DOWN.
>> WELL, I AIN'T MOST PEOPLE.
AM I?
>> Sreenivasan: RECAPPING OUR
TOP STORY IN AN OVAL OFFICE
SPEECH TONIGHT, PRESIDENT OBAMA
SAID THERE IS NO EVIDENCE
SHOWING THAT ANY OVERSEAS GROUP
DIRECTED THE SHOOTERS WHO KILLED
SO MANY PEOPLE IN CALIFORNIA
FOUR DAYS AGO.
THE PRESIDENT URGED CONGRESS TO
AUTHORIZE THE USE OF MILITARY
FORCE AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE
OR ISIL SAID THE U.S.
WOULD NOT BE DRAWN INTO A GROUND
WAR IN SYRIA OR IRAQ.
HE ALSO CALLED FOR A NEW BAN ON
ASSAULT WEAPONS AND FOR TOUGHER
SCREENINGS TIED TO THE FEMALE
ATTACKER IN CALIFORNIA.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.